Due Monday Dec, 18 at 11am


Questions:
- Why is $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])$ homotopic either to an element of $\pi_{1}(A)$ or an element of $\pi(B)$? Wouldn't this imply that it is a loop? (Bottom of page 4)



Abstract: I will present the Seifert-Van Kampen theorem following the approach of Bray, Butscher, and Rubinstein-Salzedo (CITE).

<h1 align = center>
Introduction
</h1>
check spelling of kampen

background and significance

The Seifert-Van Kempan theorem is a foundational result in Algebraic Topology. It provides a method for computing fundamental groups of spaces which can be broken up into simple, easy to study spaces. It has utility in computing the fundamental groups of many spaces, especially those arising in complex construction (CITE). First we review some algebra that will arise in the structure of fundamental group constructed from Seifert-Van Kampen. Next we exposit the algebraic topology tools of homotopy and fundamental groups. The Seifert-Van Kampen theorem is presented with four increasingly general statements, finishing with the statement in full generality. We finish with an interesting consequence about the occurrence of groups as fundamental groups.


<h1 align=center>
Background Algebra
</h1>

Let $G$ be a group. A set $S\subseteq G$ is a *generating set* for $G$ if every element of $G$ is a product of elements of $S$. A set $S$ and binary operation *generates* a group of all products of its elements. A collection $R$ of finite tuples of elements of $S$ is called a set of *relations* on $S$. Each tuple $r=(g_{1},\ldots,g_{n})\in R$ is interpreted as $$g_{1}\cdots g_{n}=e,$$where $e$ is the identity in $G$.
If the group generated by $S$ subject to $R$ is $G$, $(S,R)$ is said to be a *presentation* of $G$. This is denoted $S=\langle S|R\rangle$. Presentations are not necessarily unique. For any group $G$, the $G$ is a generating set. Therefore, $G=\langle G|R\rangle$ where $R$ is the set of relations in $G$. For many groups, a smaller presentation can be found. For example, the group of integers modulo $2$ has presentation $$\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}=\langle1|(1,1)\rangle,$$and $$\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}=\langle1|(1,\ldots,1)\rangle$$where the single relation is $n\cdot 1=0$. If the presentation of a group $G$ has no relations, $G$ is said to be a *free group*. The group of integers under addition is a free group with presentation$$\mathbb{Z}=\langle1|\ \rangle.$$The free group with two generators has presentation $$F_{2}=\langle a,b|\ \rangle.$$The elements of $F_{2}$ are all finite products of the form $$a^{n_{1}}b^{m_{1}}\cdots a^{n_{k}}b^{m_{k}}$$for integers $n_{1},\ldots, n_{k}$ and $m_{1},\ldots,m_{k}$. Two notable subgroups of $F_{2}$ are $A=\langle a|\ \rangle$ and $B=\langle b|\ \rangle$. An element of $F_2$ may be viewed as a sequence $$a_{1}b_{1}\cdots a_{k}b_{k}$$where $a_{1},\ldots,a_{k}\in A$ and $b_{1},\ldots,b_{k}\in B$. Given any two groups $G$ and $H$, we can use the same process to define a new group $$G*H=\{g_{1}h_{1}\cdots g_{k}h_{k}:g_{1},\ldots,g_{k}\in G \text{ and } h_{1},\ldots,h_{k}\in H\}.$$The group $G*H$ is called the *free product* of $G$ and $H$. 

Let $\{G_\alpha\}$ be a collection of groups. The generalized free product is defined to be$$G=*_{\alpha}G_\alpha=\{g_{\alpha_{1}}\cdots g_{\alpha_{n}}:g_{\alpha_{i}}\in G_{\alpha_{i}}\text{ and }n\ge0\}.$$The carrier of $G$ is the set of all finite strings of elements of the disjoint union $\bigsqcup G_\alpha$. $G$ has binary operation juxtaposition of strings. Note that a homomorphism on $G$ is well-defined by the image of each element of $\bigsqcup G_{\alpha}$. Let $\phi:G\rightarrow H$ be a homomorphism and let $g\in G$ with $g=g_{\alpha_{1}}\cdots g_{\alpha_{n}}$ where $g_{\alpha_{i}}\in G_{\alpha_{i}}$ for all $i$. Then, $$\phi(g)=\phi(g_{\alpha_{1}}\cdots g_{\alpha_{n}})=\phi(g_{\alpha_{1}})\cdots \phi(g_{\alpha_{n}}).$$

We will also use quotient groups. Let $G$ be a group and $N$ be a normal subgroup of $G$. The *quotient group* $$G/N =\{gN:g\in G\}$$is the group of cosets of $N$ in $G$. The binary operation on $G/N$ is $$g_{1}N\cdot g_{2}N=\{k_{1}k_{2}:k_{1}\in g_{1}N \text{ and }k_{2}\in g_{2}N\}.$$With the assumption that $N$ is normal, we may write $$k_{1}k_{2}=g_{1}n_{1}g_{2}n_{2}=g_{1}g_{2}(g_{2}^{-1}n_{1}g_{2})n_{2}=g_{1}g_{2}n'n_{2}$$for some $n\in N$. So, the binary operation on $G/N$ is equivalent to $$g_{1}N\cdot g_{2}N=g_{1}g_{2}N$$There is a natural projective homomorphism $\text{proj}:G \rightarrow G/N$ defined by $$\text{proj}(g)=gN.$$It is easily verified that $\text{proj}$ is a homomorphism: $$\text{proj}(g_{1}g_{2})=g_{1}g_{2}N=g_{1}N\cdot g_{2}N=\text{proj}(g_{1})\text{proj}(g_{2}).$$We may now formalize what it means for a group to be generated by a pair of generators and relations. $\langle S|R\rangle$ is a presentation for $G$ if $G$ is isomorphic to the quotient of the free group generated by $S$ with the normal subgroup generated by $R$. 


<h1 align=center>
Background Topology
</h1>

Let $X$ be a topological space, and let $x,y\in X$. A path in $X$ from $x$ to $y$ is a continuous function $\phi\colon[a,b]\rightarrow X$ such that $\phi(x)=\phi(y)$. We will assume all spaces are pathwise connected, that is, there exists a path between any pair of points. A loop is any path with the same starting and ending point. This shared endpoint is called the loop's *basepoint*.

We will define an equivalence of paths in any topological space. The idea is that two paths $\alpha$ and $\beta$ with the same endpoints are equivalent if one may be continuously deformed to the other. This continuous deformation may be thought of as a family of paths parameterized by a time variable $t$:

IMAGE

Formally, let $\alpha:[0,1]\rightarrow X$ and $\beta:[0,1]\rightarrow X$ be two paths from $p$ to $q$. A *homotopy* from $\alpha$ to $\beta$ is a continuous function $F:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ such that $F(s,0)=\alpha(s)$, $F(s,1)=\beta(s)$, $F(0,t)=p$ and $F(1,t)=q$ for all $t$. If such a map exists, $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are said to be *homotopic*, and we write $\alpha\sim \beta$. It may easily be shown that homotopic is an equivalence relation, and it forms the topological notion of path equivalence.

EXAMPLE OF A HOMOTOPY

In algebraic topology, we are primarily interested in loops. The *homotopy class* of a loop $\gamma$ based at $x$ is $$[\gamma]=\{\theta :\theta\sim \gamma \text{ and }\theta \text{ is based at }x\}.$$Showing whether two loops are homotopic can be quite difficult. Intuitively, $\theta\sim\gamma$ if a compact region enclosed by the two has "no holes". 

EXAMPLES OF HOW HOLES STOP HOMOTOPY

Two paths $p$ and $q$ that share an endpoint may be *concatenated* as follows: $$p\cdot q(t)=\begin{cases}p(t) & \text{if }0\le t\le 1 \\
q(t-1) & \text{if }1\le2\end{cases}$$The path $p\cdot q$ connects the start point of $p$ to the endpoint of $q$. Homotopies of paths have nice behavior when it comes to concatenation. Let $\gamma$ and $\theta$ are two paths in sharing an endpoint $X$ with $\gamma\sim \gamma'$ and $\theta\sim \theta'$. Then, $$\gamma \theta\sim \gamma'\theta'.$$
VISUAL PROOF

One tool for describing the homotopy classes of a space is the fundamental group. Let $X$ be a topological space and let $x\in X$ be a basepoint. The *fundamental group* of $X$ with basepoint $x$ is $$\pi_{1}(X,x)=\{[\gamma]:\gamma \text{ is a loop based at }x\}.$$The fundamental group is a group under loop class concatenation (CITE). It characterizes the homotopy equivalences of a topological space. It turns out that the fundamental group is independent of the choice of basepoint for a pathwise connected space (CITE). We may write $\pi_{1}(X)$ to denote the fundamental group of $X$ for some fixed point.

Fundamental groups have many important applications. For instance, a topological space is said to be *contractible* if it is homotopy equivalent to a point. Any contractible space has a trivial fundamental group (CITE 9.8). Conceptually, this is similar to Figure NUMBER; if we can contract the whole space to a point, then we can also shrink all loops to that point. Characterizing contractible spaces is an interesting problem that is related to fundamental groups. The (SOMETHING) space with nontrivial fundamental group is the circle. There are many ways to prove $$\pi_{1}(\mathbb{S}^{1})\cong \mathbb{Z}.$$It is easy to convince oneself of this fact, if you accept that loops that wind around the circle a different number of times cannot be homotopic. ...

Two topological spaces are homotopy equivalent if and only if their fundamental groups are isomorphic (CITE). The stronger conditions of homeomorpic, contractible, ... may be refuted when isomorphism fails.

Computing fundamental groups is a hard problem. If we can express a space a union of simple spaces with known fundamental groups, the Seifert-Van Kampen Theorem provides a method for determining the fundamental group of the full space. 


<h1 align = center>
Wedge Sums and Induced Homomorphisms
</h1>

Let $f:(X,x)\rightarrow (Y,y)$ be a continuous map of based topological spaces. Then, $f$ induces a homomorphism $\phi:\pi_{1}(X,x)\rightarrow \pi_{1}(Y,y)$. The map $\phi$ is defined by composing $f$ with paths in $X$. So, $$\phi([\gamma])=[f\circ \gamma]$$for all $[\gamma]\in \pi_{1}(X,x)$. Since $f$ is continuous, $f\circ \gamma:[0,1]\rightarrow Y$ is continuous. Since $f$ fixes the basepoint, $(f\circ \gamma)(0)=f(x)=y$, and $f(1)=y$. Therefore, $f\circ \gamma$ is a loop based at $y$ in $Y$. To show $\phi$ is well defined, consider $[\gamma],[\theta]\in \pi_{1}(X,x)$ with $[\gamma]=[\theta]$ (WORK ON WORDING). Let $F:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ be a homotopy with $F(s,0)=\gamma(s)$ and $F(s,1)=\theta(s)$. Then, $f\circ F:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow Y$ is a homotopy of $f\circ \gamma$ and $f\circ \theta$. So, $$[f\circ \gamma]=[f\circ \theta]$$in $Y$. Of note is the homomorphism induced by inclusion. Let $X$ is a topological space and $A\subseteq X$ be a subspace. If $A$ and $X$ are based at $x\in A$, the inclusion map $A\hookrightarrow X$ is a continuous map fixing $x$. So, it induces the inclusion homomorphism $$\pi_{1}(A,x)\hookrightarrow \pi_{1}(X,x).$$
We will define an operation for combining topological spaces. Wedge sums are a common application of Seifert-Van Kampen, especially in cell complexes (CITE). Let $A_\alpha$ be a collection of topological spaces. Pick $x_{\alpha}\in A_{\alpha}$ for all $\alpha$. Let $X=\bigsqcup A_\alpha$, and define an equivalence relation on $X$ by $x_{\alpha}\sim x_{\beta}$ for all $\alpha,\beta$. The *wedge sum* of $A_\alpha$ is the the quotient space $$\bigvee_{\alpha}A_{\alpha}=X/\sim.$$The topology of all points besides $x_{\alpha}\in A_{\alpha}$ is locally the same as in $A_\alpha$. A neighborhood of $x_\alpha$ is the union $$U=\bigcup_{\alpha}U_{\alpha},$$where $U_\alpha$ is a neighborhood of $x_\alpha$ is $A_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$. This method of identifying one common point among all of the spaces is one of the simplest ways to join them. We will see in an application of Seifert-Van Kampen that it has powerful utility.
<h1 align = center>
Wedge Sum of Two Circles
</h1>
>[!thm]
Let $X$ be the wedge sum of two circles with basepoint $x$. Then, $$\pi_{1}(X,x)\cong F_{2}$$

This first special case of the Seifert-Van Kampen Theorem is quite intuitive. One can imagine generating any loop at $x$ by first traversing the left circle $n_{1}$ times, then traversing the right circle $m_{1}$ times, and continuing ... (WORDING). Let $a$ be the loop in $X$ that travels around the left circle once, and let $b$ be the loop in $X$ that travels around the right circle once, both in the counterclockwise direction. So, the general element of $\pi_{1}(X,x)$ formed by the process just described would be $$a^{n_{1}}b^{m_{1}}\cdots a^{n_{k}}b^{m_{k}}.$$Of course, this is just an element of $F_{2}$, where $a$ and $b$ are the generators. To formalize the proof, lets construct an explicit bijection $\phi:F_{2}\rightarrow \pi_{1}(X,x)$. Let $\alpha,\beta$ be the generators of $F_{2}$. The homomorphism $\phi$ is well defined by $$\phi(\alpha)=a,\phi(\beta)=b.$$Let $A,B$ be two open subsets of $X$ with $X=A\cup B$ as shown in Figure NUMBER. Then, $a([0,1])\subseteq A$ and $b([0,1])\subseteq B$. Let $\gamma$ be a loop in $X$ based at $x.$ Partition $[0,1]$ into finitely many subintervals $[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$ as follows. Let $s_{0}=0$ and $s_{n}=1$. For each $i$, $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])$ is a loop at $x$ with $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])\subseteq A$ or $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])\subseteq B$. If $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])\subseteq A$, then $\gamma([s_{i+1},s_{i+2}])\subseteq B$ and vice versa. 

Suppose we needed infinitely many subintervals to do this. Then, for each $i\in \mathbb{N}$, there exists $x_{i}\in[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$ with $\gamma(x_{i})\in A-B$ or $\gamma(x_{i})\in B-A$ and if $\gamma(x_{i}\in A-B)$, then $\gamma(x_{i+1})\in B-A$ and vice versa. As $x_{i}\le x_{i+1}\le 1$ for all $i$, $x_{i}\rightarrow x\in[0,1]$ by [[Monotone Convergence Theorem]] (CITE?). Without loss of generality, suppose $\gamma(x_{2i})\in A-B$ for all $i$. As $A$ is open, there exists a neighborhood of $\gamma(x_{2i})$ contained in $A$. But this neighborhood contains no points $\gamma(x_{2i+1})$, since it is disjoint from $B-A$. So, $\gamma(x_{i})$ does not converge, contradicting the continuity of $\gamma$. By contradiction, a finite partition of $[0,1]$ may be constructed.

Suppose $\gamma([s_{i},s_i+1])\subseteq A$. Construct a homotopy of $\gamma$ restricted to $[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$ to a loop by retracting the regions outside of $A$ to $x$. Let $s_{m}=\sup\{x\in[s_{i},s_{i+1}]:\gamma(x)\notin A\}$ and $s_{u}=\inf\{x\in[s_{i},s_{i+1}]:\gamma(x)\notin A\}$. Since a loop exiting $A$ must pass through $x$, $\gamma(s_{m})=\gamma(s_{u})=x$. Let $F:[s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ be defined by $$F(s,t)=\begin{cases}\gamma(s_{i}+t(s_{m}-s_{i})) & \text{if }s\le s_{i}+t(s_{m}-s_{i}) \\
\gamma(s_{i+1}-t(s_{i+1}-s_{u})) & \text{if }s\ge s_{i+1}-t(s_{i+1}-s_{u})\\
\gamma(s) & \text{otherwise}\end{cases}$$Note that $F(s,0)=\gamma(s)$ for all $s\in[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$. If $s\in[s_{m},s_{u}]$, then $F(s,1)=\gamma(s)$. Since $F(s_{m})=\gamma(s_{m})=x$ and $F(s_{u})=\gamma(s_{u})=x$, $F$ is a homotopy of $\gamma$ restricted to $[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$ with a loop in $A$. (NEED TO SHOW $F$ CONTINUOUS)

So, $\gamma|[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$ is [[Homotopic]] to a loop $\theta$ in $A$ or $B$. If $\theta([0,1])$ is contained entirely in $A$, then $\theta=a^{k_{i}}$ for some integer $k_{i}$. Equivalently, if $\theta([0,1])$ is contained entirely in $B$, then $\theta=b^{k_{i}}$. By choosing a partition $s_{i}$ of $[0,1]$ such that $\gamma([s_{0},s_{1}])\subseteq A$, we may write  $$\gamma=\gamma|[s_{0},s_{1}]\cdot\gamma|[s_{1},s_{2}]\cdots \gamma|[s_{n-1},s_{n}]\simeq a^{k_{0}}b^{k_{1}}\cdots a^{k_{n-2}}b^{k_{n-1}},$$showing that $\gamma$ is in the equivalence class $$[a^{k_{0}}b^{k_{1}}\cdots a^{k_{n-2}}b^{k_{n-1}}].$$Therefore, $[\gamma]$ is in the image of $\phi$ and $\phi$ is surjective.

To show that $\phi$ is injective, we will show that its kernel is trivial. Let $\omega\in F_2$ with $\phi(\omega)$ mapping to the identity in $\pi_{1}(X,x)$. So, $\phi(\omega)$ is the [[homotopy Class]] of the trivial loop. Let $\gamma$ be a loop in $X$ centered at $x$ homotopic to the trivial loop. Let $F:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ be a homotopy of $\gamma$ to the trivial loop with $F(s,1)=\gamma(s)$. Partition $[0,1]\times[0,1]$ into regions bounded by the curves for which $F(s,t)=x$ (WORDY). For each region $S$, $F(S)\subseteq A$ or $F(S)\subseteq B$, since a path can only pass from $A-B$ to $B-A$ or $B-A$ to $A-B$ through $x$. Define a map $G$ as follows: $$G(s,t)=\begin{cases}x & \text{if}\ t\le\sup\{y\in[0,1]:F(s,y)=x\} \\
F(s,t) & \text{otherwise}\end{cases}$$Let $[s,t]$ such that $\gamma([s,t])\subseteq A$. Then, $G|[s,t]\times[0,1]$ is a homotopy of $\gamma|[s,t]$ with the trivial loop: (JUSTIFY WITH IMAGE)

So, $\gamma$ is the concatenation of loops in either $A$ or $B$ each homotopic to the trivial loop in $X$. Therefore, $\gamma$ is the trivial loop in $X$. Since $\phi$ is injective, since its kernel is trivial.

<h1 align = center>
(Theorem 12.2)
</h1>
Some elements of the previous proof were specific to the wedge sum of circles. But many of the ideas hold in a more general discussion. For instance, we can easily translate the notion of breaking paths into an alternating concatenation between the spaces. A natural follow up is to ask what kind of similar results exist for the connection of two arbitrary spaces. The Seifert-Van Kempan Theorem characterizes the fundamental group of an arbitrary union of spaces. Let's begin with a special case that closely resembles Theorem NUMBER.

>[!thm]
Let $X$ be a [[Topological Space]] with $X=A\cup B$, $A,B$ [[Open Set]], and $A\cap B$ [[Pathwise Connectedness]] and [[Simply Connected]]. Let $x\in A\cap B$. Then, $$\pi_{1}(X,x)\cong\pi_{1}(A,x)*\pi_{1}(B,x).$$

We can easily see that Theorem NUMBER is an application of Theorem NUMBER by taking $A$ and $B$ as described in the proof above. To prove Theorem NUMBER, we will follow a parallel argument with some more generality. Again, construct an isomorphism $\phi:\pi_{1}(A,x)*\pi_{1}(B,x)\rightarrow \pi_{1}(X,x)$. The homomorphism $\phi$ is well defined by its image of each element of $\pi_{1}(A,x)\sqcup \pi_{1}(B,x)$. If $\alpha$ is a loop in $A$, the homotopy class of $\alpha$ in $A$ is mapped to the homotopy class of $\alpha$ in $X$, and likewise for loops in $B$. 

Let $\gamma$ be a loop in $X$ based at $x$. Partition $[0,1]$ into subintervals $[s_{i},s_{i+1}]$ as follows. Let $s_{0}=0$ and $s_{n}=1$. Let $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])\subseteq A$ or $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])\subseteq B$ for all $i$ with $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])\subseteq A\implies \gamma([s_{i+1},s_{i+2}])\subseteq B$ and vice versa. Then, $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])$ is a path in $A$ or $B$. 

Let $\theta_{i}$ be a path from $x$ to $\gamma(s_i)$ such that the image of $\theta_{i}$ is contained in $A\cap B$. Note that $\theta_{i}$ exists for each $i$ since $A\cap B$ is path connected and $\gamma(s_{i})$ lies in $A\cap B$. Let $c_{i}=\theta_{i}\cdot \gamma|[s_{i},s_{i+1}]\cdot\bar{\theta}_{i+1}$ where $\bar{\theta}_{i+1}$ traces backwards along $\theta_{i}$. Then, $c_{i}$ is a loop in either $A$ or $B$ for each $i$. Additionally, note that $$\begin{align*}c_{0}c_{1}\ldots c_{n-1}&=(\gamma|[s_{0},s_{1}]\cdot \bar{\theta}_{1})\cdot(\theta_{1}\cdot \gamma|[s_{1},s_{2}]\cdot\bar{\theta}_{2})\cdots(\theta_{n-1}\gamma|[s_{n-1},s_{n}])\\&\simeq \gamma|[s_{0},s_{1}]\cdot \gamma|[s_{1},s_{2}]\cdot\gamma|[s_{n-1},s_{n}]\\
&=\gamma\end{align*}$$Therefore, $\gamma$ is homotopic to a product of loops with $c_{i}\in \pi_{1}(A,x)$ or $c_{i}\in \pi_{1}(B,x)$ for each $i$. We may write $$[\gamma]=[c_{0}c_{1}\cdots c_{n-1}]=[c_{0}][c_{1}]\cdots[c_{n}]\in \pi_{1}(A,x)*\pi_{1}(B,x).$$Since $[\gamma]$ is in the image of $\phi$, $\phi$ is surjective.

Let $[\omega]\in \pi_{1}(A,x)*\pi_{1}(B,x)$ with $\phi([\omega])=[\gamma]$. If $[\gamma]$ is the identity in $\pi_{1}(X,x)$, then there is a homotopy $F:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ with $F(s,1)=\gamma(s)$ and $F(s,0)=x$. Partition the $s$-interval $[0,1]$ and the $t$-interval $[0,1]$ as follows. Let $s_{0}=0,s_{n}=1$ and $t_{0}=0,t_{n}=1$. Let $$F([s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[t_{j},t_{j+1}])\subseteq A$$or $$F([s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[t_{j},t_{j+1}])\subseteq B$$for all $i,j$. Combine adjacent rectangular regions if both $F([s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[t_{j},t_{j+1}]),F([s_{i+1},s_{i+2}]\times[t_{j},t_{j+1}])\subseteq A$ ($B$) or $F([s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[t_{j},t_{j+1}]),F([s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[t_{j+1},t_{j+2}])\subseteq A$ ($B$). Enumerate the regions in $[0,1]\times[0,1]$ $R_{1},\ldots, R_{m}$. For any $R_{i},R_{j}$ adjacent, $F(R_{i})\subseteq A$ and $F(R_{j})\subseteq B$ or $F(R_{j})\subseteq A$ and $F(R_{i})\subseteq B$. Then, $F(R_{i}\cap R_{j})\subseteq A\cap B$. So for any $R_{i}$, the image of its boundary under $F$ must lie in $A\cap B$. So, $F(\partial R_{i})$ is a loop in $A\cap B$. Since $A\cap B$ is simply connected, $F(\partial R_{i})$ is homotopic to the trivial loop. Continuously deform $F$ so that for all $R_{i}$ with $R_{i}\cap[0,1]\times\{1\}=\emptyset$, $$F(\partial R_{i})=x.$$In other words, there is a homotopy mapping the boundaries of each of the square regions not bordering the $t=1$ portion of the unit square to $x$. 

Let $F$ refer to the deformed homotopy. Define a new homotopy $G:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ such that $G(s,t)=F(s,t)$ if $s,t\in R_{i}$ for some region $R_{i}$ bordering the $s=1$ portion of the unit square and $G(s,t)=x$ otherwise. $G$ is continuous by the [[Pasting Lemma]] (CITE). Consider the restriction of $G$ to $[s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[0,1]$. This restriction is a homtopy of $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])$ with the trivial loop. Let $R_{j}$ be the highest (CLARIFY) rectangle intersecting $[s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[0,1]$. Then, $$G([s_{i},s_{i+1}]\times[0,1])\subseteq F(s_{i},s_{i+1})\cup\{x\}\subseteq A\ (B).$$So, $\gamma([s_{i},s_{i+1}])$ is homotopic to the trivial loop in $A$ ($B$). Therefore, the homotopy class $[\gamma]$ is the concatenation string of the identities of $\pi_{1}(A,x)$ and $\pi_{1}(B,x)$. So, $[\gamma]$ is the identity in $\pi_{1}(A,x)*\pi_{1}(B,x)$. Therefore, the kernel of $\phi$ is trivial.

<h1 align = center>
(Theorem 12.3)
</h1>

>[!thm]
>Let $X$ be a [[Topological Space]] with $X=A\cup B$, where $A,B$ are [[Open Set]] and $A\cap B$ is nonempty and [[Pathwise Connectedness]]. Assume that $B$ is [[Simply Connected]]. Then $$\pi_{1}(X)\cong \pi_{1}(A)/ N,$$where $N$ is the smallest [[Normal Subgroup]] [[Subgroup]] containing the [[Image]] of $\pi_{1}(A\cap B)$ under the [[Induced Homomorphism]] by the [[Inclusion Map]] $i:A\cap B \rightarrow A$.

>[!thm]
>Let $X$ be a [[Topological Space]] with $X=A\cup B$, where $A,B$ are [[Open Set]] and $A\cap B$ is nonempty and [[Pathwise Connectedness]]. Assume that $B$ is [[Simply Connected]]. Then $$\pi_{1}(X)\cong \pi_{1}(A)/ N,$$where $N$ is the normal closure of $\pi_{1}(A\cap B)$ in $\pi_{1}(A)$. 

By removing the hypothesis that $A\cap B$ is simply connected, there is no longer necessarily an isomorphism between $\pi_{1}(X)$ and $\pi_{1}(A)*\pi_{1}(B)$. Note that since $B$ is simply connected, $\pi_1(B)$ is trivial and $\pi_{1}(A)*\pi_{1}(B)=\pi_{1}(A)$. So, Theorem NUMBER may be thought of as extending the existence of a surjective map from Theorem NUMBER and characterizing the extent to which it fails to be injective.

Proof: First, observe that any loop $\gamma$ in $X$ is homotopic to a loop $\gamma'$ contained in $A$. Let $$\gamma=\gamma_{1}\gamma_{2}\cdots \gamma_{n}$$where $\gamma_{i}([0,1])\subseteq A$ or $\gamma([0,1])\subseteq B$, and the endpoints of each subcurve $\gamma_{i}(0)$ and $\gamma_{i}(1)$ are contained in $A\cap B$. Consider a subcurve $\gamma_{i}$ with image contained in $B$. Let $\gamma_{i}'$ be a path in $A\cap B$ connecting the endpoints of $\gamma_{i}$. Then, $\gamma_{i}\gamma_{i}'$ is a loop in $B$, so it is homotopic to the trivial loop in $B$. Parametrize $\gamma_{i}$ and $\gamma_{i}'$ over $[0,\frac{1}{2}]$ and let $F:[0,1]\times[0,1]\rightarrow X$ be a homotopy of $\gamma_{i}\gamma_{i}'$ with the constant loop $x$. So, $F(s,1)=x$ for all $s$, $F(s,0)=\gamma_{i}(s)$ for all $s\in[0,\frac{1}{2}]$, and $F(s,0)=\gamma_{i}'(s-\frac{1}{2})$ for all $s\in\{0\}\cup[\frac{1}{2},1]$. We may construct a homotopy of $\gamma_{i}$ and $\gamma_{i}'$ by first contracting $\gamma_{i}$ to $x$, then projecting $x$ to $\gamma_{i}'$. Let$$G(s,t)=\begin{cases}F(\frac{s}{2},2t) & \text{if }t\le \frac{1}{2} \\F(\frac{1+s}{2},2-2t) & \text{if }t\ge \frac{1}{2}\end{cases}
$$Since $F(s,1)=x$ for all $s$, $G$ is continuous by the [[Pasting Lemma]]. Since, $G(s,0)=F(\frac{s}{2},0)=\gamma_{i}(\frac{s}{2})$ and $G(s,1)=F(\frac{1+s}{2},0)=\gamma_{i}'(\frac{s}{2})$, $G$ is a homotopy of $\gamma_{i}$ and $\gamma_{i}'$. 

If $\gamma_{i}$ has image contained completely in $A$, simply let $\gamma_{i}'=\gamma_{i}$. Repeating this procedure for each $\gamma_{i}$, we maintain $[\gamma_{i}]=[\gamma_{i}']$ for all $i$. So, the loop $$\gamma'=\gamma_{1}'\gamma_{2}'\cdots \gamma_{n}'$$satisfies $[\gamma']=[\gamma]$.

So, each loop $\gamma$ in $X$ is homotopic to a loop $\gamma'$ in $A$. Additionally, $[\gamma']\in A$, so we may define $\phi:\pi_{1}(X) \rightarrow \pi_{1}(A/N)$ by $$\phi([\gamma])=\text{proj }([\gamma'])$$where $\text{proj}$ is the natural projective homomorphism from $\pi_{1}(A)$ to the quotient group $\pi_{1}(A/N)$. 

Let $\gamma_{1}\in[\gamma]$. Then, $\gamma_{1}\in[\gamma']$, so $$\phi([\gamma_{1}])=\phi([\gamma])$$Therefore, $\phi$ is well-defined. Let $\gamma,\theta$ be two loops in $X$ based at $x$. Note that $$\begin{align}
\gamma &\sim \gamma'\\
\theta &\sim \theta'\\
\gamma \theta&\sim(\gamma \theta)'
\end{align}$$Now use the homomorphism of path homotopies: $$\gamma'\theta'\sim \gamma \theta\sim(\gamma \theta)'.$$So, $$\phi([\gamma \theta])=\text{proj}([(\gamma \theta)'])=\text{proj}([\gamma'\theta'])=\text{proj}([\gamma'][\theta'])=\text{proj}([\gamma'])\text{proj}([\theta'])$$since $\text{proj}$ is a homomorphism. Since $\phi(\gamma)\phi(\theta)=\text{proj}([\gamma'])\text{proj}([\theta'])$, $\phi$ is also a homomorphism. 

As before, we show that $\phi$ is surjective and injective. Let $x\in \pi_{1}(A)/N$. Since $\text{proj}$ is surjective, $$x=\text{proj}([\gamma])$$for some $[\gamma]\in \pi_{1}(A)$. If $\gamma([0,1])\subseteq A$, $\gamma=\gamma'$. Therefore, $$\phi([\gamma])=\text{proj}([\gamma'])=\text{proj}([\gamma])=x$$So, $\phi$ is surjective.



Let $\gamma$ be a loop in $X$ and suppose $\phi([\gamma])$ is the identity. The identity of $\pi_{1}(A)/N$ is $N$. So, $$\phi([\gamma])=\text{proj}([\gamma'])=[\gamma']N=N$$Since $N$ is a group, it has an identity $e$. Since $[\gamma']N=\{[\gamma']n:n\in N\}$ and $e\in N$, $[\gamma']e=[\gamma']\in N$.

Since $N$ is generated by the set of loops $[\alpha][\theta][\alpha]^{-1}$ where $[\alpha]\in \pi_{1}(A)$ and $[\theta]\in \pi_{1}(A\cap B)$, we may write $$[\gamma']=[\sigma_{1}][\gamma_{1}][\sigma_{1}]^{-1}\cdots[\sigma_{n}][\gamma_{n}][\sigma_{n}]^{-1}$$where $[\sigma_{1}],\ldots,[\sigma_{n}]\in \pi_{1}(A)$ and $[\gamma_{1}],\ldots,[\gamma_{n}]\in \pi_{1}(A\cap B)$. Note that for each $i$, $$\gamma_{i}([0,1])\subseteq A\cap B\subseteq B,$$and $B$ is simply connected. So in $X$, $\gamma_{i}$ is homotopic to the trivial loop, giving $$[\gamma']=[\sigma_{1}][\sigma_{1}]^{-1}\cdots[\sigma_{n}][\sigma_{n}]^{-1},$$which reduces to the identity in $X$. Therefore, $[\gamma']$ is the identity and $\gamma'$ is homotopic to the trivial loop. As $\gamma'$ is homotopic to $\gamma$, $\gamma$ is also homotopic to the identity in $X$. Since $[\gamma]$ is the identity of $\pi_{1}(X)$, $\phi$ has trivial kernel and is injective.

<h1 align = center>
(Theorem 1.20)
</h1>
Let $X$ be a topological space decomposed as a union of open sets $A_\alpha$. Let $x$ be the basepoint of $x$ and suppose $x\in A_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$. Each inclusion map $A_{\alpha}\hookrightarrow X$ induces a homomorphism $j_{\alpha}:\pi_{1}(A_{\alpha})\rightarrow \pi_{1}(X)$. These homorphisms extend to a homorphism $\Phi:*_{\alpha}\pi_{1}(A_\alpha)\rightarrow X$, defined by $$\Phi(g_{\alpha})=j_{\alpha}(g_{\alpha})$$for all $g_{\alpha}\in \pi_{1}(A_{\alpha})$. We denote the homomorphism induced by the inclusion $A_{\alpha}\cap A_{\beta}\hookrightarrow A_\alpha$ by $i_{\alpha\beta}$. 

>[!thm]
>Let $X$ be a [[Topological Space]] and let $$X=\bigcup A_\alpha$$where $A_\alpha$ is [[Open Set]], $x_{0}\in A_{\alpha}$, and each [[Intersection]] $A_{\alpha}\cap A_{\beta}$ is [[Pathwise Connectedness]] for all $\alpha,\beta$. Then, 
>1. the [[Homomorphism]] $\Phi:*_{\alpha}\pi_{1}(A_{\alpha})\rightarrow \pi_{1}(X)$ is [[Surjective]]. 
>2. If each [[Intersection]] $A_{\alpha}\cap A_{\beta}\cap A_{\gamma}$ is [[Pathwise Connectedness]], then the [[Kernel]] of $\Phi$ is the [[Normal Subgroup]] $N$ generated by all the elements of the form $i_{\alpha \beta}(\omega)i_{\beta \alpha}(\omega)^{-1}$ for $\omega\in \pi_{1}(A_{\alpha}\cap A_\beta)$, and hence $\Phi$ induces an [[Isomorphism]] $\pi_{1}(X)\approx*_{\alpha}\pi_{1}(A_\alpha)/N$.

First note that Theorem NUMBER provides two generalizations of Theorem NUMBER. First, $X$ may be a union of arbitrarily many open subsets. We immediately see that all of the previous iterations of the theorem apply for arbitrary unions (MIGHT NEED TO CLARIFY ...). Second, there are no restrictions on the fundamental groups of each $A_\alpha$. The proof of Theorem NUMBER follows the same pattern as the previous proofs (CITE).


Before proving the full theorem, lets introduce a generalization of the procedure used used in prior proofs of decomposing a path into a product of paths with each factor path contained completely in a single component space. Let $[\gamma]\in \pi_{1}(X,x)$. Then, a *factorization* of $[\gamma]$ is a product $[\gamma_{1}][\gamma_{2}]\cdots[\gamma_{n}]$ that satisfies three conditions. For all $i$, $\gamma_{i}$ is a loop based at $x$ in $A_\alpha$ for some $\alpha$. The product $\gamma_{1}\cdots \gamma_{n}$ is homotopic to $\gamma$ in $X$. While before we focused on restrictions of $\gamma$ to intervals that made *paths* in a single component space, the factorization is expressed in terms of loops homotopic to these paths.

...

Since $\Phi$ is surjective, a factorization exists for all $[\gamma]\in \pi_{1}(X,x)$.

<h1 align=center>
Examples and Applications
</h1>

As one application of the Seifert-Van Kampen theorem, we will prove the following result about the occurrence of groups as fundamental groups.

>[!thm] 
>Every [[Group]] occurs as the [[Fundamental Group]] of some [[Topological Space]]. 

Let $G$ be a group and let $G=\langle S|R\rangle$ be a presentation of $G$. Let $$X=\bigvee_{\alpha\in S}\mathbb{S}_{\alpha}^{1}.$$Identify $\alpha\in S$ with the loop that goes around $\mathbb{S}_{\alpha}^{1}$ once. 

Theorem 8.1 shows that the fundamental group of $X$ is the free group on with generators $S$: $$\pi_{1}(X)=F_{S}.$$Let $$Y=X\bigsqcup_{r\in R}D_{r}^{2}$$

For each relation $r=(\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{n})\in R$, let $r_{\alpha}$ be the concatenation of loops $$r_{\alpha}=\alpha_{1}\cdots \alpha_{n}.$$Let $\phi_{r}$ be a continuous map of the boundary of $D^{2}_{r}$ onto $\alpha$. We will identify points in the loop defined by $r$ with points in the boundary $D_{r}^{2}$ Define an equivalence relation $\sim_r$ on $Y$ by $$\phi_{r}(y)\sim_{r}y$$for $y\in \partial D_r^2$. Let $$\sim=\bigcup_{r\in R}\sim_{r}.$$

Note that we may interpret $\phi_{r}$ as a loop in $Y/\sim$. While $\phi_{r}$ technically maps $\mathbb{S}^{1}$ into $Y/\sim$, we may pick a point $y\in\mathbb{S}^{1}$ mapped to the basepoint of $x$. Let $\eta:[0,1]\rightarrow \mathbb{S}^{1}$ be the map wrapping $[0,1]$ around the circle once with $0,1\mapsto y$. Then, the map $\eta\circ \phi_{r}$ naturally extends $\phi_{r}$ to a loop in $Y/\sim$. 

Let $U$ be a contractible neighborhood of $x_{\alpha}$ in $X$. Let $V_{r}$ be a sufficiently small contractible neighborhood of $x_{\alpha}$ in $D_{r}$ for each $r$. By sufficiently small, we mean a neighborhood that does not contain the loop $\alpha$ for any $\alpha\in S$ (see Figure NUMBER). Define $A=X\cup \bigcup V_{r}$, an open set in $Y/\sim$ containing $X$ and homotopy equivalent to $X$. For each $r$, let $$A_{r}=D_{r}^{2}\cup U\bigcup_{d\ne r}A_{r}.$$This is an open set in $Y/\sim$ containing and homotopy equivalent to $D_{r}^{2}$. 

IMAGE of small enough $V_\alpha$.

Take $r_{1},r_{2}\in R$ with $r_{1}\ne r_{2}$. Let $\omega$ be a loop in $A_{r_{1}}\cap A_{r_{2}}$. Note that $A_{r_{1}}$ and $A_{r_{2}}$ are both contractible, so they have trivial fundamental group. Let $i_{1}$ and $i_{2}$ be the induced homomorphisms by the inclusions $A_{r_{1}}\cap A_{r_{2}}\hookrightarrow A_{r_{1}}$ and $A_{r_{1}}\cap A_{r_{2}}\hookrightarrow A_{r_{2}}$. Then, $i_{1}(\omega)$ is the identity, since $\pi_{1}(A_{r_{1}})$ is trivial. Similarly, $i_{2}(\omega)^{-1}$ is the identity. Therefore, $i_{1}(\omega)i_{2}(\omega)^{-1}$ is the identity element. 

Let $r\in R$ and let $\omega$ be a loop in $A\cap A_{r}$. Let $i$ and $i_{r}$ be homomorphisms induced by the inclusions $A\cap A_{r}\hookrightarrow A$ and $A\cap A_{r}\hookrightarrow A_{r}$. Note that $r_\alpha$ is a loop in $A\cap A_{r}$, since the boundary of $D_{r}^{2}$ is identified with $r_\alpha$ and $D_{r}^{2}\subseteq A_{r}$. Suppose $\omega=r_\alpha$. As before, $i_{r}(\omega)^{-1}$ is the identity. The loop $r_\alpha$ is homotopically nontrivial in $X$. Since $A$ is homotopy equivalent to $X$, $i(\omega)$ is the loop $r_\alpha$, the image of $\phi_{r}$. More generally, if $\omega$ is the concatenation $r_{\alpha}^{n}$, $i(\omega)i_{r}(\omega)^{-1}=i(r_{\alpha}^{n})=[\phi_{r}]$ in $Y/\sim$. Now consider the case where $\omega$ is not reducible to a power of $r_{\alpha}$. Since we chose a sufficiently small neighborhoods $V_{r}$, no full $\alpha$ are contained in $V_{r}$. So, $V_{r}$ is contractible in $Y/\sim$ and $i(\omega)$ is the identity. We have shown that the normal subgroup $N$ in Theorem 8.1 is generated by the loops $\phi_{r}$ for $r\in R$. 

IMAGE of 

The identification of loops in $X$ with elements of $S$ shows that $N$ is also the normal subgroup generated by $R$. Now, Theorem 8.1 implies that $Y/\sim$ has fundamental group $\pi_{1}(X)/N\cong F_{S}/N$. And the formal definition of presentations states that $G\cong F_{S}/N$. So, $$\pi_{1}(Y/\sim)\cong G.$$

